Dashboards are a staple of any designportfolio, but most suck. Not becausethey're ugly, but because they'redisorganized and messy. So, in thisvideo, I'm going to show you how todesign your very first dashboard UIcompletely from scratch in a way that'ssimple, aesthetic, and actually usable.And by the end, you won't just have agreat-look layout. You'll understand whythe best dashboards feel effortless touse. It starts with the sidebar, whichhouses most of the persistent andglobally relevant elements. Think aboutit as the spine of your product.Elements like navigation, profilemanagement and search are typically inhere, but sometimes profile managementand search can go in the top bar, too.Starting from the top, sometimes a logois put up here, but I find this a moreconvenient spot for profile management.A profile picture makes it easy toidentify, and the arrows indicate thatthis is clickable. Next, links. We wantto start with a recognizable icon and ashort title. This is especially helpfulif you plan on making your sidebarcollapsible, like this. And it's alsohelpful if you want to add anotification number or a new chip to it.Navigation is all about reducingcognitive load. To do that, we'll wantto group our links by what's relevant.And then since settings and help centerare rarely used, we can send them downto the bottom. As the amount of linksexpands, you'll want to start nestinglinks into drop downs. And make sure tohave an active state. We're using thisrectangle as an indicator. This isoptional, but if you want to highlightfeatures, search or integrations, thiswould be a good place to put them in.Finally, also optional, but with allthis empty space, we could add in somenotifications. Companies like Dub andLinear have already started doing thissort of thing. And just like that,you've built an aesthetic, but alsofunctional sidebar super easily. If itwasn't clear already, we're building alink tracking software for this demo.So, let's get into it. Sidebars arerelatively hard to screw up. The samecannot be said about dashboards. Thisdashboard feels like someone emptied adrawer onto the screen. If yourdashboard looks like it requires a PhDto operate, then it's too complex. Justdo one thing well with your dashboard.First, I want to point out a fewimportant considerations. If you comparea dashboard to a landing page, you'llsee the features of a dashboard are muchsmaller because we're trying to shove inmany more things. These are the textilesfor the landing page, and these are thetextiles for the dashboard. We've got alot of smaller font sizes without muchspacing in between sizes. Grids andlayouts are also much more strictlyfollowed for dashboards than landingpages because we're using most or all ofthe space on screen. Third and final,what you put in this main section of thedashboard reflects what is mostimportant to the user. For example, ifyou're building a project managementdashboard, displaying the project statuswould be very useful. Or if you'rebuilding a financial dashboard, youshould show investments right at thetop. Taking all of that intoconsideration, we'll be using a verysimple two column, two row grid withlink management at the top and a fewimportant metrics down below. The verytop of the dashboard is generallyreserved for important page actions orsimple navigation. For our relativelysimple dashboard, we'll have a drop downand a button to make a link, which seemspretty important. For any data displayedon the homepage, you'll want to keep itsuper simple. So, we'll just have thefavicon, the shorten link, the actuallink, and when it was made. We'll alsoadd how many clicks each link hasgotten. Since we still want to have agood amount of space in the middle, wecan add a brief description, kind ofsimilar to GitHub. If we wanted visualseparation, we can make each link haveits own border. But for less clutter,we'll stack them into a list. Thislayout also makes it easier to add anempty state when there are no links todisplay, which is important to bethinking about. Now, this static list islooking great, but in real worldapplications, we need to manage dataefficiently. This is where a small microinteraction comes in. Letting the userselect multiple links which reveals anew contextual button, bulk actions.Moving on to the charts below. Let's doit properly. First, don't make weird like this. I don't know what theseare, and neither does anyone else.Instead, let's start with a basic linegraph. Add some grid lines and numberssince everyone forgets those. Pop in aquick summary and date selector, andwe're good to go. For the other one,we'll have a bar chart to break down byeach link with the favicon on the sideto make them easily identifiable. We'lladd the same range selector and give theuser access to signups and conversion onthis chart, too. There's no reason thatcharts can't be simple and informative,but also aesthetic. But sometimes youneed some inspiration first. And onetool I use all the time for this isMvin, who curates hundreds of thousandsof beautifully organized screenshotsfrom real apps. things like projectmanagement tools, banking dashboards,and even admin panels. You can search byelement like charts or even filter byindustry or device type. And it's notjust pretty UIs. It helps me see howreal teams design flows like how theyonboard users or structure complexsettings pages. You can check out Mobinusing my link in the description to get20% off. However, most of thefunctionality of a dashboard isn'tactually here in what we've built. We'redisplaying a lot of information, but wecan't do anything yet. That's wheremodals, popovers, and even new pagescome into play. A popover is somethinglike this, and best used when thecontext is simple, like these displaysettings, and are nonblocking, meaningthe user can click away without anyconsequences. A modal is best used whenthe context is more complex, but youstill want to keep the user on the samepage. This is because creating a link isdirectly related to the links that aredisplayed on screen. A modal isconsidered blocking because you need toclick create or cancel before dealingwith other things. And since you can'tsee the page when the changes are beingmade, a toast notification confirmingthe changes is generally a goodpractice. Speaking of toasts, they'rethe notification system of yourdashboard. Anytime you want to make theuser aware of something without takingover the entire screen or prompt them totake action, you use a toast. We talkedabout empty states earlier, but toastsare great for a warning or error states,which frequently get missed. Finally, ifthe context is more permanent or is verylarge, like clicking on an existinglink, it's reasonable to direct the userto a new page. If you're going to dothat, having a back button or breadcrumbis pretty much required. We've justbuilt the bulk of one page on adashboard, but laying out other pagesare fairly trivial since there arereally only four main dashboardcomponents. First, lists and tables.These are the most common, and we'veused several of them already, from ourlink table to link details or even thesidebar. Making a good list mostly comesdown to separation with three ways to doit. The first is just space. The secondis lines or dividers. And the third iswith color. But making a good table ismore about functionality wheredisplaying the data is only half thebattle. Giving the user the options tosearch, filter, or sort the tabletransforms it into an interactive tool.Next is cards. This includes our chartsand toast notifications. Most dashboardsare comprised of many cards together.Keep the margins well spaced so contentisn't too tightly packed. Also, you canchoose between a border or backgroundcolors. I prefer outlines on dark modesand background colors on light mode, butthat's totally up to you. User input isanother common one. We've used thesemaking our link modal and any sort ofsettings pages has them. Or if you'relucky, you'll get tables with formsinside of cards like here on Versel.Fourth and final are tabs. These arefantastic for essentially adding newpages without cluttering the sidebar.For example, in notion, we get differentviews of very related tables withoutleaving the context of the page.Breaking Notion settings down a littlemore, we've got mostly lists with someuser inputs and some cards once we getto connections, all inside of a modal.So once you master these four elements,you can build virtually any dashboardpage. Finally, animation and interactionon dashboards is pretty tame and userfocused when compared to some websitesand landing pages. Starting with ourchart animations, here is where we canget a little more creative. For example,on this chart, when we hover, we get thenumber as well as a bubble with apercent in it. Or on our other chart,when we hover, all of the other bars dimout. But what everyone wants is asnappy, fast dashboard. That's whereoptimistic UI comes into play. Forexample, on Gmail, when I delete anemail, it disappears instantly, assumingthat the server request will succeed.The app is optimistic that it willsucceed so you don't get these awkwardpauses before your link disappears. Andwith that, you have the majority of afunctional aesthetic dashboard, which ismore than most designers can say. Ifyou're interested in checking out Mobin,it'll be the first link down below. AndI also have the design files listed downthere, too. Thanks for watching, andI'll see you in the next one.[Music]